learn: add learning resources (#41)
botlabs-gg/yagpdb-docs-v2: content/learn/intermediate/outputs-2.md

+++
title = "Outputs 2"
weight = 310
+++

Until now, we have just used the [default response behavior](/learn/beginner/outputs-1) to make our custom commands
respond with some text. This makes sense for quick mockups or relatively simple commands. However, this may be
inconvenient or Not What You Want in some cases. In this chapter, we will explore how to send messages to different
channels, edit existing messages, and send messages with embeds, vastly expanding your toolbox for creating complex
custom command systems.

## Sending Messages

We provide several `sendMessage*` functions that all do the same thing: send a message to a channel. The difference
between them is how they handle special mentions like `@everyone` and `@here`, and whether to return the ID of the
message after sending it. We will cover these functions in detail in the following sections, and when to best use them.

Let's get started with the simplest of them all, `sendMessage`. Its syntax is the following:

```go

> {{ sendMessage channel_id message_to_be_sent }}

Reviewer: The case difference is indeed to differentiate between function names and arguments. I'd prefer to standardize on snake_case so we should probably leave the cases here as is.

> {{ sendMessage channel_id message_to_be_sent }}

Reviewer 2: Sounds good, the database page extensively uses `<PascalCase>` currently so it should be changed instead.

```

> The `channel_id` is the ID of the channel to send the message to. If you want to send the message in the same channel as

Reviewer: Saying that channel_id could be a name of a channel is something I'd rather avoid; we could rename `channel_id` to `channel` or, alternately, keep the text as is and let users figure out that names are also permitted from the reference documentation. The latter is my preference; I don't want to encourage using names in guide-level text which (aims to, at least) illustrate best practices. WDYT?

> The `channel_id` is the ID of the channel to send the message to. If you want to send the message in the same channel as

Reviewer 2: Fair point, I agree that this should show best practices.

the one in which the custom command was triggered, simply set `channel_id` to `nil`.

> Intuitively, `message_to_be_sent` denotes the output that is to be sent as a message. For now, we will just say it is a
> string with the content you want to send. We will cover sending embeds in a later section on this page.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Intuitively, `message_to_be_sent` denotes the output that is to be sent as a message. For now, we will just use a
string with the content you want to send. We will cover sending embeds in a later section on this page.
```

+++
title = "Outputs 2"
weight = 310
+++

Until now, we have just used the [default response behavior](/learn/beginner/outputs-1) to make our custom commands
respond with some text. This makes sense for quick mockups or relatively simple commands. However, this may be
inconvenient or Not What You Want in some cases. In this chapter, we will explore how to send messages to different

> channels, edit already sent messages, and send messages with embeds, vastly expanding your toolbox for creating complex

Reviewer: edit existing messages?

custom command systems.

## Sending Messages

We provide several `sendMessage*` functions that all do the same thing: send a message to a channel. The difference
between them is how they handle special mentions like `@everyone` and `@here`, and whether to return the ID of the
message after sending it. We will cover these functions in detail in the following sections, and when to best use them.

Let's get started with the simplest of them all, `sendMessage`. Its syntax is the following:

```go
{{ sendMessage channel_id message_to_be_sent }}
```

> The `channel_id` is the ID of the channel in which the message is to be sent. If you want to send the message in the

Reviewer: ID of the channel to send the message to

same channel as the one in which the custom command was triggered, simply set `channel_id` to `nil`.

Intuitively, `message_to_be_sent` denotes the output that is to be sent as a message. For now, we will just say it is a
string with the content you want to send. We will cover sending embeds in a later section on this page.

### Special Mentions

By default, the bot will escape special mentions like `@everyone`, `@here`, and role mentions. If you want to send a
message with these mentions, you'll need to tell the bot to not escape them. You do this by using the
`sendMessageNoEscape` function instead of `sendMessage`.

```go
{{ sendMessageNoEscape channel_id message_to_be_sent }}
```

### Returning the Message ID

If you want to store the ID of the message you just sent, for example to later edit it, you use the `sendMessageRetID`
function. Assign the result of this function to a variable, otherwise it will be rendered to the output and become

> unusable for further usage in your custom command.

Reviewer: for example to later edit it, use the `sendMessageRetID` function and assign the result into a variable.

The second sentence is probably superfluous.

```go
{{ $messageID := sendMessageRetID channel_id message_to_be_sent }}
```

Naturally, we provide a combination of the `sendMessageRetID` function with the `sendMessageNoEscape` function if you

> want to send a message with special mentions and store the ID of the message.

Reviewer: we provide a variant of the `sendMessageRetID` function that does not escape mentions:

```go
{{ $messageID := sendMessageNoEscapeRetID channel_id message_to_be_sent }}
```

It is quite the mouthful to write, but just roll with it.

## Building Embeds

Embeds are a powerful way to display information in a structured and visually appealing way. They can contain a title,
description, fields, images, and more. We provide a function to build embeds in a way that closely resembles the
structure as defined by the Discord API.

> We will illustrate this with a sparse example. For a full breakdown of all available fields, please refer to our

Reviewer: with a simple example

[custom embeds documentation](/docs/reference/custom-embeds).

```go
{{ $embed := cembed
    "title" "This is a title"
    "description" "This is a description."
    "color" 0xff0000
    "fields" (cslice
        (sdict "name" "Field 1" "value" "Value 1" "inline" true)
        (sdict "name" "Field 2" "value" "Value 2" "inline" true)
    )
    "author" (sdict
      "name" .User.Username
      "icon_url" (.User.AvatarURL "256")
    )
}}
{{ sendMessage nil $embed }}
```

> <div style="float: right; margin-left: 7px; margin-bottom: 10px;">

Reviewer: Is the raw HTML strictly necessary? I'd prefer to leave it out if possible.

Author: The image is rather small—I'd like to keep it to the right of the text. I'm not aware of a markdown / shortcode way.

Reviewer: Fair enough, resolving.

![Embed Example](embed-example.png)

</div>

The above code will generate an embed as shown on the left. Let us dissect it a bit. First, we simply define a variable
`$embed` and assign it the result of the `cembed` function. This function takes a series of key-value pairs, where the
key is the field you want to set, and the value is the value you want to set for that field. The `cembed` function will
return a structured object that can be sent as a message, as demonstrated in the last line of the code.

The `"title"` and `"description"` fields are self-explanatory---we can use Discord Markdown in the latter. The `"color"`
field is in our case a hexadecimal color value that will be used as the color of the embed, but it can also take a
[decimal value](https://www.binaryhexconverter.com/hex-to-decimal-converter).

> The `"fields"` field is a list (we call it slice) of dictionaries, where each dictionary represents a field in the embed.

Reviewer: a list (more precisely a _slice_)

[v-embed]: https://yagpdbembeds.netlify.app/
[prefill]: https://yagpdbembeds.netlify.app/?data=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

{{< /callout >}}

## Editing Messages

Sending a message is nice and all, but for the sake of keeping things clean, you might want to edit a message instead of
creating a new one each time something changes. We provide the `editMessage` function for this purpose.

```go
{{ editMessage channel_id message_id new_message_content }}
```

> The `channel_id` is the ID of the channel in which the message is located. The `message_id` is the ID of the message you

Reviewer: ID of the channel containing the message

want to edit. The `new_message_content` is the new content you want to set for the message, completely replacing it.

> You should note that YAGPDB can only edit messages from itself, just like you cannot edit someone else's messages.

Reviewer: is the new content of the message, which will completely overwrite the existing content. See [editing-embeds] if you only want to change certain fields of an existing embed while leaving others intact.

For a quick demonstration, consider the following code:

```go
{{ $messageID := sendMessageRetID nil "Hello, World!" }}
{{ sleep 5 }}
{{ editMessage nil $messageID "Goodbye, World!" }}
```

This code sends a message saying "Hello, World!" and then, after 5 seconds, edits the message to say "Goodbye, World!",
all in the same channel where the custom command was triggered.

### Editing Embeds

Editing embeds is a little more involved than editing regular messages. You need to provide the entire embed object
again, old parts included. This is due to how the Discord API functions. The basic idea is that we obtain the old embed

> object, modify it, and then send the modified object back to the `editMessage` function.

Reviewer: Editing embeds is a little more involved than editing regular messages. Since the data provided to `editMessage` completely overwrites the existing content, it is necessary to retrieve the existing embed object, modify the desired fields, and provide the whole embed to `editMessage`.

> A contrived example all within the same custom command looks like the following:

Reviewer: An elaborate example

```go
{{ $embed := cembed
    "title" "This is a title"
    "description" "This is a description."
    "color" 0xff0000
    "fields" (cslice
        (sdict "name" "Field 1" "value" "Value 1" "inline" true)
        (sdict "name" "Field 2" "value" "Value 2" "inline" true)
    )
    "author" (sdict
      "name" .User.Username
      "icon_url" (.User.AvatarURL "256")
    )
}}
{{ $messageID := sendMessageRetID nil $embed }}
{{ sleep 5 }}

> {{ $new_embed := structToSdict $embed }}

Reviewer: newEmbed

Author: Not me mixing camelCase and snake_case

{{ $new_embed.Set "title" "This is a new title" }}
{{ $new_embed.Set "description" "This is a new description." }}

> {{ $new_embed.Set "fields" (cslice) }}

Reviewer: Not sure if I like this. One might rightfully question why `$new_embed.Del "fields"` is insufficient (and the answer would be that `$new_embed.Del "Fields"` is necessary due to `structToSdict` not converting case), but that complicates the explanation considerably. Might be worth leaving this line out and addressing it later in the section discussing deep conversion? If you choose to keep it in, explain why `$new_embed.Del "fields"` doesn't work.

{{ editMessage nil $messageID (cembed $new_embed) }}
```

In the second part, after `{{ sleep 5 }}`, we first convert the original embed object to a dictionary using the
`structToSdict` function. We then modify the fields we want to change using the `Set` method. In this case, we change
the title and description of the embed, and remove all fields. Finally, we send the modified embed object back to the
`editMessage` function.

> As mentioned previously, this example is contrived and meant to demonstrate the process. In practice, we're more likely

Reviewer: this example is contrived: in practice, we're more likely to ...

to use `.Message.Embeds` to get the original embed object, convert and modify it as shown above, then send it back to
the `editMessage` function.

{{< callout context="note" title="Note" icon="outline/info-circle" >}}

> `structToSdict` does not perform deep conversion and has some other general inconsistencies. For a full conversion of an

Reviewer: `structToSdict` does not perform deep conversion and does not convert the case of field names.

(structToSdict isn't inconsistent; it's perfectly well-defined--but it isn't sufficient for the use-case.)

Author: Ah, that was me misinterpreting the `embedtosdict` snippet from the support server, there it says:

```
tructToEmbed does not change the keys so there are some inconsistencies (causing some parts of the embed to be left out without the following code).
```

Certainly well-defined, as you said, just initially unintuitive.

## Complex Message Builder

We learned how to send messages and embeds individually---we can also combine them in a single message. This is where we
have to use the `complexMessage` builder function. In this case, we will use the `"content"` and `"embed"` key to set
the respective parts of our message:

```go
{{ $embed := cembed
    "title" "This is a title"
    "description" "This is a description."
    "color" 0xff0000
    "fields" (cslice
        (sdict "name" "Field 1" "value" "Value 1" "inline" true)
        (sdict "name" "Field 2" "value" "Value 2" "inline" true)
    )
    "author" (sdict
      "name" .User.Username
      "icon_url" (.User.AvatarURL "256")
    )
}}

{{ $message := complexMessage
    "content" "This is some content, appearing above the embed below."
    "embed" $embed
}}

{{ sendMessage nil $message }}
```

Similarly, we provide a `complexMessageEdit` function to edit messages with both content and embeds. The syntax is the
same as `complexMessage`, minus a few keys that cannot be edited. Please refer to the documentation below.

The `complexMessage` builder takes a lot more keys that give you fine-grained control over the message you want to send.

> For a full breakdown of all available keys, please refer to the [message functions documentation][message-docs].

Reviewer: Refer to the [message functions documentation] for a complete description.
